
Now I face the problem that has apparently buffaloed Lotus’s advertising staff:
describing just what Agenda does. The possibilities are easy to demonstrate on
a computer screen but a little trickier to explain.

To start with the big picture, Agenda has three operating components: items,
categories, and views. Items are the basic units of information. If you are
using Agenda to keep a schedule, each item will be an appointment or a task. If
you are using Agenda for accounting, each item will be a transaction. If you
are using Agenda for what is, in my view, its most revolutionary and valuable
purpose—manipulating very large amounts of research or reference data—each item
will be a quotation, a piece of data, a chart, or anything else you want to
find later on.

Categories are the attributes you ascribe to each item. Time can be a category,
and in a scheduling system, events that happen today will be in the “today,”
“this week,” “this month,” and “this year" categories. Categories can be
priorities—high, medium, never. They can be the people in charge of various
tasks. If you were cataloguing baseball cards, the categories could include
team, position, and year. Categories can include zip codes for addresses, or
yes/no listings about whether something has been done. They can be substantive
themes—“Meiji restoration,” “Mississippi politics during Reconstruction”—for
research material.

There is no built-in limit on the categories you can define.

Finally, views are presentations of the information in your items, selected and
arrayed according to the categories you specify. This may sound similar to what
a normal data-base program does. With Paradox, dBase IV, R:BASE, and so on, you
can retrieve pieces of information through a query, according to the criteria
you choose. (“Show me the last name, first names, and phone number for all
families whose addresses have a zip code from 10001 to 10292.”) The difference
is that Agenda eliminates the need for queries. Most data-base programs have
one bedrock chunk of data, the mother lode, from which you request samplings
from time to time. In its fundamental technology Agenda also has one mother
lode of data, but—in ways that are, again, easier to appreciate on the
screen—it creates the illusion that the information exists in small,
pre-customized chunks. You can create an Agenda view called “New York City,”
comparable to the zip-code query above. Whenever you flip there, with one key,
it can show you all the dealings you’ve had with anyone in New York.

The artificial-intelligence part of the system comes from the interaction of
items, categories, and views. The simplest illustration involves dates. If you
type in an item saying “Have lunch at noon next Tuesday,” Agenda will
automatically schedule it for the proper date and time. If you type “Lunch
meeting at noon every Tuesday,” it will generate Tuesday bookings on into
forever.

The rules for converting “next Tuesday” into “May 26, 1992” are built into
Agenda, as they are into a number of scheduling programs. What makes Agenda
unusual is that you can develop unlimited numbers of other rules. Any item
including the words “Call Mom” can automatically be sent to the “high priority”
category. Anything including the words “file estimated taxes” can come up on
the appropriate quarterly dates. Some obligations become more important the
longer you delay them—paying bills, for example. Others become less
important—say, buying tickets for a concert that’s already occurred. You can
arrange for Agenda to move events of the first type up the priority list and
discreetly eliminate the second from your file. If you type in “See Sue next
Wednesday about Hmong families in Fresno,” the item can automatically appear in
views displaying “topics to discuss with Sue,” “events next week, ” “
immigration from Asia,” “California sociology,” or any other grouping you
choose.

Most of the examples I’ve given involve one of Agenda 2.0’s built-in sample
applications: Planner, which is an appointment and to-do system. This is where
most people start with Agenda, because its functions look familiar.
Unfortunately, this very familiarity undersells Agenda’s potential. Everyone
has seen scheduling programs before, and initially this looks like just one
more of them. Indeed, if your only goal were to keep track of appointments and
business contacts, programs designed for that purpose and no other, such as one
called Act!, would prove faster and more efficient. I use my own version of
Planner, with “Call Mom ”—type rules built in, and after many years of using
Paradox to keep track of accounting information, I’ve switched to an Agenda
application I developed.

What I value most in Agenda is a function that I didn’t know it had when I
bought it. I use it every day to organize and keep track of large quantities of
research information. I don’t know of any other program that can do this as
flexibly as Agenda can.

Suppose you had collected information on your computer in dribs and drabs,
knowing that eventually you would need to put it together in some organized
way. Perhaps you had been copying out notes and citations for a thesis, or
collecting information from an on-line data base, or in any other way storing
facts for later use. (Obviously the information has to be on your computer
disk, rather than on a printed page, before Agenda can deal with it. This is a
fundamental barrier for most computer programs, which will be breached when
optical character-recognition systems become reliable and you can “scan” a
passage from a book or a report into your computer.) Agenda can then sort the
information into usable categories, according to rules you specify. If your
project concerned the history of China, you could specify that any paragraph
containing the words “John King Fairbank” could be assigned to categories such
as “Harvard scholars,” “long-term impact of American missionary families,” and
“Who Lost China controversy.” If you were researching world leaders, you could
assign all names including “King” to the “royalty” category, except those also
including the words “John Fairbank,” “Martin Luther,” or “Kong.”

Thinking up appropriate rules is time-consuming, but no more so than with any
other cataloguing system, computerized or manual. Once you have laid out the
rules, Agenda can retroactively apply them to information already in your
computer and automatically categorize each new bit of data you add.

Then you have the payoff: being able to switch from view to view and see
exactly the information you are looking for. If I want to see all items
concerning relations between America and China, I bring up one view. If I want
to see all citations I’ve collected from the writings of John King Fairbank,
including some that were also in the “America and China ” view, I can switch
there. Then, if I want to see notes on the influence that the children of
American missionaries in Asia have had, I can switch to another view and see
comments from Fairbank, Edwin Reischauer, and Henry Luce.

Through a process that I would love to describe but that would seem
incomprehensible to the civilian reader, I have used views and categories to
make Agenda into an extremely powerful outlining system. Agenda’s categories
can be arrayed in hierarchies, like a normal outline. Chapter 1 can be a
category, with subcategories like 1-A and 1-B, each of which can have several
generations of subcategories of its own. If I know that one of Fairbank’s
comments should show up in Chapter 7, section B, subsection 3, I can assign it
to that category. I can use another set of categories to classify items as used
or not used. When I am finished quoting from Fairbank, Agenda can remove the
item from the screen and put it in a different view, showing when and how I
used it. Neither Agenda nor anything else in computing can make up for bad
organization or sloppy thought. But, like a word processor compared with the
old typewriter-and-correction-fluid approach, it reduces the practical barriers
to writing and thinking.



