
VIEWS
Views are Agenda's window to the outside world.
Views can be used to enter items and assign them to categories.
Views are also used to retrieve information from the database and
organise it differently to the way it was entered.
You can create as many views into a single Agenda database as you
need.
Each view can display a different set of items together with the
categories they are assigned to.
Sections
Views are broken up into sections.
Each section heading is a category and underneath it are displayed all
the items assigned to that category.
A view can have as many sections as you need.
Columns
As well as sections, a view can have columns added to either the left
or right of the item's text.
These are used to display any categories which the item is assigned
to.
Copyright 1992 Page 2.11
Applied Self Management Using Lotus Agenda
VIEWS
Using the example above one view of the database might look like this:
Task Who When
. Call Bill Tuesday to organise Bill 1/3/92
the overhead projector
. Collect photocopying for the Snap 3/3/92
Agenda course from Snap on
Thursday
In this case the section is 'Task'.
The items are listed under the section heading.
The columns 'Who' and 'When' have been added to the right of the
items.
In the two columns, you can see the categories that the items have
been assigned to.
Copyright 1992 Page 2.12
Applied Self Management Using Lotus Agenda
VIEWS
Filters
Views can also include 'filters'.
A filter allows you to include (or exclude) items in a view depending
on which categories they are assigned to.
Using the example above, if the filter was set to include only items
assigned to the 'Bill' category, then the second item would not be
displayed.
Alternatively the filter might be set to include all items except
those assigned to the 'Bill' category. In this case, only the second
item would be shown.
View Types
Agenda has two types of view:
_ Standard
_ Datebook
The example above is a standard view.
Datebook views show the items organised by dates.
