TASK LIST
Applied Self Management Using Lotus Agenda
Copyright 1992, Pages 5.5-5.8

An effective way of managing your time and achieving goals is to maintain a
daily or weekly task list. The list is nothing more than a brief description
of each activity and when it should be done by. If activities are priorities
you can work your way through the list, dealing with the highest priority
tasks first. Agenda can be used to create and maintain a task list.

Setting Up the Database:

  1. Create a new database with the name 'tasks'.
  2. Go to the Category Manager.
  3. Edit the 'Initial Section' supplied by Agenda and change its name to
     'Task Type'.
  4. Add the following Categories as children of 'Task Type':
       Planning
       Meeting
       Report
       Memo
       Letter
       Education
       Telephone
       Visit
       Routine
  5. Add a new Category 'Prty' with the following children:
       Vital
       Important
       Some value
  6. Change the Properties of the child Categories of 'Prty' so that they
     have the following short names:
       Vital         A
       Important     B
       Some value    C
  7. Add a numeric Category 'No' and a standard Category 'Routine Tasks'.

Configuring the Ad-hoc Tasks View:

  1. Return to the View and change the View Properties:
       View name        Ad-hoc Tasks
       Sections         All children of 'Task Type'
       Hide Done Items  Yes
  2. Add a column for the 'When' Category to the right of the item.
  3. Change the column properties so that the Date Format is 'Relative'.
  4. Add two columns for the 'Prty' and 'No' Categories to the left of
     the Item.
  5. Change the column width of the 'Prty' column to three characters.
  6. Change the Properties of the 'No' column:
       Width      3
       Decimals   0
       Total      No
  7. Enter some ad-hoc tasks that you need to perform during the next week.

Creating the Routine Tasks View:

  1. Create a new View:
       Name       Routine tasks
       Sections   Routine tasks
       Columns    Prty, No, When
  2. Change the Properties of the 'When' column:
       Width        30
       Date Format  Relative
  3. Enter some routine tasks that you perform every day, week or month.

Creating the Weekly Tasks View:

  1. Create a new view:
       Name       Weekly Tasks
       Type       Datebook
       Columns    Task type, Prty, No
  2. Sort the Items by 'Prty' and 'No'.

Setting Up Assignment Conditions:

  1. Go to the Category Manager.
  2. Change the Properties for the Category 'Routine' (child of 'Task type')
     to add an Assignment Condition to assign Items to 'Routine' if they are
     assigned to 'Routine Tasks'.
  3. Force Agenda to re-execute all of the assignments.
