
PLANNING PROJECTS
Agenda's excellent date facilities make it an ideal tool for project
planning.
Project planning involves:
Identifying the tasks that need to be
carried out
Deciding when they need to be done
Identifying any dependencies between
tasks
Assigning the tasks to people
You would probably not use Agenda as a fully-blown project management
system as there is a lot of more powerful, specialised software for
this purpose.
However, Agenda is ideal for small projects or for the planning phase
of larger projects.
Copyright 1992 Page 4.2
Applied Self Management Using Lotus Agenda
PLANNING PROJECTS
Create a new database with the name 'projplan'.
Edit the 'Initial Section' supplied by Agenda and change the name to
'Task'.
Go to the Category Manager and add the following Categories:
People (standard category)
Finish (date category)
Return to the view and add columns for the following categories:
People
When
Finish
Change the column width of the 'When' and 'Finish' columns to be eight
characters wide.
Think about a project that you may have to undertake in the near
future.
Enter the tasks that are involved in this project as Items.
Assign the Tasks to people by typing their names in the 'People'
column.
Show when the task must start by typing dates in the 'When' column.
Copyright 1992 Page 4.3
Applied Self Management Using Lotus Agenda
PLANNING PROJECTS
Type the date that the task must finish in the 'Finish' column.
Select the 'View Properties' dialogue box and change the name of the
view to 'Tasks'.
Create a new view of the database with the following properties:
View name: Task Assignments
View type: Standard
Sections: Children of 'People'
Create a third view of the database with the following properties:
View name: Schedule
View type: Datebook
End category: End
Period: Month
Interval: Daily
Look carefully at the tasks you have entered.
Are there any tasks that are dependent on prior tasks being completed
before they can commence?
If not, invent some now and enter them as items.
Set up the task dependencies.
Change the View Properties to hide dependent Items.
Copyright 1992 Page 4.4
Applied Self Management Using Lotus Agenda
PLANNING PROJECTS
Mark some of the tasks that are prerequisites for dependent tasks as
'Done'.
Use Agenda's 'Show View' to display the prerequisites for a dependent
task.
Copyright 1992 Page 4.5
Applied Self Management Using Lotus Agenda
